I'm really excited to announce our last, but absolutely not the least, keynote speakers
are Roger Ping and Hilary Parker, the hosts of Not So Standard Deviations.
If you've never heard of it before, really fantastic podcast, they've never invited
me to be a guest speaker, but fortunately I'm not bitter about that at all.
But seriously, I'm very long-term fans of Roger and Hilary, Roger has been a very supporter
of the Tidyverse really before it was the Tidyverse, and I think his USAR 2018 keynote
does a better job of kind of articulating the philosophy and the benefits of the Tidyverse
than I've ever managed.
I'm also very fortunate to call Hilary a friend, Hilary is a fantastic data scientist, I've
had a number of really insightful conversations with her, one recent one which led me to really
understand like one of the things that I do is design, but as well as being a data scientist
at Stitch Fix, Hilary, I'm also very lucky that Hilary has acted as my stylist and she
actually just picked out the clothes I'm wearing today.
So I'd like you to please join me in welcoming Hilary and Roger.
Okay, so you're going to get a little behind-the-scenes action here, because the listeners of our
show don't see this, but we have to do this every time, when you're dealing with a high-stakes
situation like this, safety comes first.
So we have a checklist that we go through every time, so we're going to go through the
checklist.
Okay, Hilary, hardwired?
Yeah.
I guess we don't really need that.
VPN turned off?
Yeah.
My work VPN causes problems with our connections.
Yes.
Wi-Fi turned off?
Oh, actually, I haven't turned off my Wi-Fi.
Okay.
Reboot your router?
Yeah.
Almost always my internet is the issue.
It's usually, yeah.
Verify microphone.
I think the people in the back, they seem to know what they're doing.
Verify recording.
We are recording.
All right.
Hardwired.
I'm not recording today.
How's it being written?
I'm not doing that.
Okay.
All right.
I can't remember.
We did once do a whole podcast episode where we did not record.
That's right.
Yeah.
So once that happened, like never again.
I guess that's how that made it onto the checklist.
Yeah.
We did a blameless postmortem.
Levels seem to be okay?
Yeah.
All right.
And it is close to five o'clock.
Yeah.
So-
Verify that my cat's been fed.
You've fed your cat.
Yeah.
She does, like, from four to five, she starts to interrupt things.
That was more of an issue when you were in Melbourne.
Yes.
All right.
So I think we're go for launch?
Yeah.
Go for launch.
All right.
So welcome to Not-So-Standard Deviations.
This is episode 100.
I'm Roger Pang from the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.
And I'm here with Hilary Parker of Stitch Fix.
So this episode is our first ever live episode.
Yeah.
It's, I guess, ironically, not going to be about R or RStudio.
But it's possible we showed up at the wrong conference.
But I hope you'll enjoy it.
I think it'll be fun.
Yeah.
We also did some prep.
Like, unusually.
Usually we kind of show up and call each other and say,
I was thinking about talking about this.
And so this time we actually have some materials.
Yes.
Yeah.
All right.
So I thought there are probably a few people in the audience
who haven't heard of or heard our podcast.
So we thought we'd just talk a little bit about kind of why we're here,
what we're doing, why we're doing this.
And so I guess this started in 2015,
right after the R OpenSci unconference here in San Francisco,
where Hilary and I kind of caught up.
And I sent her an email.
I said, hey, I think the subject of the email was,
I want to broadcast your opinions to the world.
Yeah.
Because, you know, Hilary has a few opinions.
And I thought there's nothing the internet likes more
than a strongly opinionated person.
All right.
So I sent her an email.
I said, hey, I think we could do a data science podcast.
I don't think there's exactly what I'm thinking about out there already
in terms of other data science podcasts.
And so, you know, do you want to do it?
And so she got back to me.
She said yes.
And I sent her a wall of text emails saying,
here's what I think we should do.
And then there was no response.
Yeah.
But then.
A week later, I apologized a lot.
Yes.
And it was true that my boss quit that week.
So there was like some reason.
But yeah, it was mostly the wall of text.
But yes.
And then we just went for it.
Yeah.
For five years since.
Or almost five years.
Yeah.
So 99 episodes.
And so here we are.
So we've been talking about a lot of things.
And one of the things over the past five years,
and one of the things that we realized as we were preparing
for this keynote is that we have like a record
of everything we've said.
Yeah.
So I wanted to make sure there was a visual impact here.
But I actually printed out the transcripts of every episode
and leafed through them.
Because it's kind of rare that you have the ability
to see what you were thinking over a period of time like this,
aside from kind of like a personal journal.
I have joked that the podcast is a little bit of like a personal journal.
But yeah.
So we wanted to look back and see what themes were coming up.
And we never set out with an agenda for this,
although I kind of thought you did at first.
But we just wanted to chat.
And then what was surprising was that we actually got some places
during these chats.
And so part of the reason I wanted to look back through these transcripts
was to see how thoughts evolved over time.
So just before we move on to the next thing,
I sort of mentioned as we were kind of leading up to this keynote,
they asked us to do this a while back.
And we saw kind of who else was going up.
So for example, JJ's keynote yesterday was amazing.
And maybe coincidentally or not,
it touched on a lot of themes that we had been discussing
in terms of open source.
Yeah.
And for those of you who are wondering,
we're not going to talk about that here.
Yeah, we're not going to talk about open source at all.
So even though our episodes have been leading up to that,
and again, we may have had some information there
that emboldened those conversations.
Look out for episode 101.
Yeah, episode 101.
We'll get back on track with that.
But yeah, we wanted to touch on those.
The keynotes have been awesome so far.
Right.
And especially, I mean, JJ's was really good.
And we were joking about the fact
that I didn't realize what a nerd he was.
Or what a policy nerd he was.
I told him it warmed my heart when
he brought up the case history of the Delaware Supreme Court.
You know, nothing more riveting than a little bit
of corporate case law, you know?
Exactly.
And it's just so lucky that someone
who had so much interest in public policy
but then became a highly productive coder for many years
and then circled back and brought them together.
It's unusual.
And then, yeah, the second keynote
with all that data visualization really spoke to me.
Because at Stitch Fix, I work a lot with outfit data.
There's a lot of imagery in fashion, right?
And so I was really inspired by that
about different ways to visualize the data.
And actually, JJ also was talking about this.
The book was called Shop Class is Soulcraft.
And this idea of touching the data
and making the data yourself.
And looking through this transcript,
actually, you had mentioned Scott Zeger
talking about writing the data down by hand.
And so I thought that was awesome.
That actually comes from John Tukey,
who talks about scratching the numbers down.
Oh, really?
Oh, there you go.
I have to say, when we saw that the two people from Google
were going to talk in the keynote,
we didn't know what it was going to be.
But I thought, oh, that one's going to be good, actually.
They're going to be very polished, very prepared.
We're like, let's do the opposite.
Yeah, right.
Let's run in the opposite direction of whatever they do.
That was where the idea of the live episode came from.
And then Jenny's talk was great, too.
She always has an amazing...
Yeah.
She has an incredible ability
to just kind of see that higher level of stuff
after having been in the trenches for so long.
Exactly, yeah.
Going into the detail and understanding the nitty-gritty,
but then being able to zoom out and create the paradigm for it.
It's not easy, so good work.
Don't get too comfortable, though.
No, but I feel like this conference has been awesome,
and we have fodder for many episodes,
following up on this stuff.
It's such a great vibe.
This is your first RStudioConf.
This is my first RStudioConf, yeah, that's right.
So one of the ideas that we had for this keynote
was to kind of go through our thought process
for the last five years,
which is made a lot easier by looking at the transcripts,
listening to the audio,
hearing what we've been talking about.
As we did that in preparation,
we noticed a number of interesting moments, of course,
and kind of recurring themes.
One of the interesting moments that we had,
actually early on in the podcast,
was our first and only use of profanity.
Maybe I just want to ask, maybe do a quick poll.
Who thinks it was me, and who thinks it was Hillary?
Who thinks it was Hillary?
Wow.
Who thinks it was me?
About 50-50.
All right, let me play this clip.
When people use spreadsheets,
they're trying to avoid syntax bullshit,
and data structure bullshit.
Because we have a lot of that in any scripted language,
where you have to know a fair amount of syntax,
and get fairly facile with data structures.
Thank you, Jenny Bryan.
It was a really popular episode.
It was.
It was super early days,
and Jenny was defending spreadsheets, essentially.
Or talking about having empathy.
Explaining the attraction of spreadsheets.
Yeah.
Another theme,
one of the most controversial things
I think we've ever discussed on the podcast,
involves this topic here.
And I want to point out that you got an oatmeal raisin for me.
What is the problem?
You're like the 10th person who's called me out on this.
You're terrible.
Why does anyone choose this?
They're delicious.
No.
I'm just going to have to enjoy them in private.
Yeah, as you should.
That's like a dagger in the heart.
Yeah.
As you should.
Oatmeal cookies, to this day,
get us a lot of feedback.
Yeah.
Terrible.
And apparently there's a huge plate of them outside,
ready for me to eat.
It's just no one else wants them.
I also love that episode we literally recorded in a Jimmy John's.
That's right.
That was, we met,
I was in town for my brother's wedding,
and we met in the middle between D.C.
My brother lives in D.C.,
and we met in the middle between D.C. and Baltimore
at a Jimmy John's and recorded it.
And you ordered an oatmeal right there.
That's right.
Hence the interesting soundtrack.
Yeah.
The other kind of,
one recurring theme that has played out over multiple episodes
is Hillary trying to get me to do stuff.
Yeah.
And so one of those things is getting Netflix, apparently.
My only problem actually is that I don't have Netflix.
Oh, come on.
You can shell out.
It's like $8 a month for Roger.
That's episode 3.
Episode 3.
Yeah.
Episode 28.
Oh, the other piece of news that's really important
is that I finally got Netflix.
And 28 is like a year later, right?
Yeah.
Yeah, because we do once every two months.
So it took you a while.
Two weeks, yeah.
Yeah, once every two weeks.
Episode 36.
So if you have access to HBO, highly recommend.
Oh, HBO.
You're like, I have to buy another service?
Yeah.
I bought Netflix for you.
Sorry.
Yeah, this one's an HBO exclusive.
Yeah.
It's $14.99 a month.
So we went from $8 to $14.99.
Yeah.
I just kind of wonder what I'm going to have to pay next.
And then episode 70.
Are they on Netflix?
I would assume so.
I don't know.
Who knows what's on Netflix these days?
So apparently I wasn't really watching it.
Yeah.
OK, so this is, I have some follow-up.
Which is that, so I have some notes here.
Episode 6, you say, I love movies.
OK.
Episode 13, you say, I'm a film nerd.
And then many times, you talked about this script book thing,
which was predicting whether a movie would be successful
based on its script.
Right.
And you had algorithms for doing that.
And then Walt Hickey came on, and you read his blog post
about books versus movies.
And you know about Steven Spielberg table reads?
Yeah.
I feel like I want the visual of handing you,
like, here's all the times you've talked about movies.
But do you not watch movies?
How does this work?
Are you just interested in movies intellectually
and never watch them?
I infer their content.
No, but, like, I really want the answer here.
Like, do you watch Netflix?
This isn't an act.
Yeah, no.
You know, things have slowed down
because of my movie-watching activity.
But you enjoy, like, the craft.
I do.
Yeah.
So, OK.
That's just weird.
I just thought you didn't know that.
So noted.
Yeah.
Anyway, the transcripts, like, really brought that home for me
because I had never, like, put those together.
And I didn't realize you said early on
that you were a film nerd.
You were like, I love living in L.A.
Or you lived in L.A. in grad school.
Yeah.
Anyway, so those are kind of, like, our fun
going back and referring themes.
But what we really wanted to talk about
was this kind of overarching theme
that actually Hadley kind of alluded to,
which is the idea of the role of design in data science.
And we...
This was something we chewed on for so long
of essentially, like, how do you do data analysis?
And one thing that really struck me looking at it
was that literally in episode one,
we talk about it a lot.
And actually, for a long time, I thought that this was why
you wanted to do the podcast.
It was, like, to solve this problem.
I had no agenda.
Yeah.
And it is surprising to look at that first transcript
to see how many seeds were planted.
Exactly.
Like, we actually talked about...
We hit words and themes that were, like...
were kind of where we got to,
but I don't think we had a way of recognizing
that those were going to be important at the time.
So we have three clips from episode one.
Just to be clear, we started this episode
talking about our cat ladies.
Yeah, that's right.
So the agenda was not super strong.
Yeah, and our cat lady...
This was, like, a little dated at this point,
but it was, like, this hashtag for, like,
seeing your cat on your keyboard
while you're writing R.
Which happens to me all the time.
Anyway.
Yeah.
So, anyway, this is from the first episode.
We have this habit of, like, telling people...
like, giving people a bunch of choices, right?
Like, you can do this, you can do that,
you can do regression, you can do smoother,
you know, whatever.
Just pick...
There's, like, five different models that you can...
or strategies that you can implement.
But we often don't, like, tell people
how to choose between those types of things.
You know, like, that's almost like...
We explicitly don't do it.
The recording quality in the early days was...
I know.
You can really tell from these clips
the variance in my recording quality,
like, personally.
But, um...
Let me just put these down.
Bump.
But, yeah, like, so...
You had...
To set that clip up a little bit more,
you, like, had an experience teaching a stat class.
Right.
Where, at the end,
someone essentially said to you, like,
as a statistician, you...
I think you did a good job of telling me things to do,
and you told me things...
definitely things not to do.
But now how do I know what to do?
Right.
Basically, like, thanks for teaching me all this stuff.
I still don't know anything.
Yeah, I still know nothing,
and I still know, like...
You sent me down to the data set.
I don't know, like, how to proceed.
Right, yeah.
And this person got an A in the class.
Yeah.
By far and away.
And my favorite part about that, too,
is that you kind of set it up as, like...
You were like, good point.
And it was the second-to-last lecture.
They, like, go to your office and, like, sit down...
Yeah.
And try to, like, write it out.
Like, OK, here's what to do.
Here's what data analysis is in one lecture.
Yeah.
Like, here's how to craft the perfect analysis.
Yeah, it didn't work.
Yeah.
It didn't work.
I think I came away with a few bullet points.
Yeah.
You know, I had a lot more thinking to do, apparently.
That was about, I guess, ten years ago now.
Wow.
Yeah.
So...
OK, so the second one...
So I was thinking when you were saying that,
is that, like, part of a successful data analysis
is convincing someone of something?
And that's, like...
That is inherently, like, a one-on-one process.
Yeah.
So we touched on, like, this...
Like, what does success look like?
Right.
Yeah, like, that was kind of what this woman was getting at.
It's like, OK, I have to do something.
I have to accomplish something.
Like, what is that thing?
And how do I decide how to do it?
Right.
Yeah.
And we don't touch the how to decide at all.
But at least we started to, like, circle around
what does it look like to do this thing that we talk about
that this whole conference is about.
And recognizing that human beings are involved.
Yeah, and humans are involved.
Yes.
Yeah.
And that's to lead into the third clip.
Right.
I think it's this human element that, you know,
that is missing, I think, from a lot of, kind of,
talk about data analysis.
It's hard.
And actually, that gets into, like, the next topic
of kind of, like, who's building successful tools.
And I think it has a lot to do with, like,
people who genuinely have empathy with the user.
Yeah.
So that was empathy.
I feel like it was a little.
But, yeah, like, these were, again,
kind of things we threw out and didn't think about
for a long time, but ended up being central themes
to what we were talking about later.
Yeah.
So...
That's episode one.
Yeah, episode one.
Covered that.
Moving on.
So, like, throughout, so we kind of have this, like,
timeline of what this looks like, like, evolving over time.
And one of the things, and, again,
this was, like, four and a half years ago.
I was still working at Etsy.
And Etsy had this kind of amazing DevOps team.
And so, for those of you who don't know,
DevOps stands for developer operator.
And it's this field where, essentially,
it was, like, kind of taking IT to the next level.
So it was saying the people who run the website,
the people who keep the servers on for the website,
the people who do everything to kind of keep this,
you know, shopping website up,
they should also be the people developing the tools
to keep the website up.
And so it's, like, developer operator.
And at Google, they kind of have a different word for it,
site reliability engineer, but it's the same thing.
And I was really inspired by that work
and kind of how they approach problems.
One of the central tenets was this idea
of a blameless postmortem,
where if you ran into a problem,
like, let's say your system failed
and the website went down,
there is a human tendency to, like, blame the person
who wrote the code that failed or whatever.
But Etsy focused a lot on, instead,
doing this thing called a blameless postmortem,
where you talk about, like, you frame the problem
as though the system failed the operator
rather than the operator failing within a good system.
And then that opens up the conversation
to, like, talk about iterating on the system
and saying, you know, okay,
this person went to work this day,
said they wanted to do a good job.
They did not say they wanted to take down the website.
But then the system, like,
allowed them to take down the website.
And so, like, based on this kind of idea
of, like, how do we know what to do,
there were sort of these two threads that started.
One was how do we decide, like,
how to build the artifact,
like the dashboard or the email or the report, whatever.
And then there was this kind of, like,
how do you build a narrative?
And so I think, like,
the theme of the early part of the podcast,
really for the first year,
was focused on that artifact question
of, like, how do you build a system that doesn't fail you?
How do you, like, decide what to do
in order to make an analysis happen that works for you?
And I was really energized
by, like, connecting these two things and being like,
well, the way we can talk about it as a community
is building systems that help you avoid errors
and articulating what those errors are,
putting cost with those errors,
and then making design decisions for your system around that.
Yeah. Yeah.
I think a lot of the struggle that we had
was in terms of kind of identifying the constraints
and identifying the frame, you know,
kind of the framing of this problem.
Yeah.
And otherwise, it's so open.
Yeah, and, like,
if you don't define this problem that way,
from, like, kind of more first principles,
you end up in these, like, nasty language wars,
or you get people who are just saying, like,
you should use Knitter, and, like,
and you don't talk about why,
and it's like, okay,
when is it appropriate to use Knitter
if you want to avoid these types of errors?
Like, you don't want to update your data
but have your report be stale, you know?
Like, that's a huge one.
And so being able to talk about the system that way,
I think, was an important part
of this kind of, like, thread of thought.
And so, again, we kind of, like, separated out that,
and I personally focused on that a lot.
I mean, we both did, but I think I, like,
that was in my head because of Etsy so much.
And then by doing that, we kind of, like,
I kind of purposely, like,
siphoned off the narrative building,
and I was like, I don't want to talk about that.
That seems really hard.
But then I feel like you ran with that a little bit.
Well, first...
First, you moved to San Francisco.
First, yeah.
So I quit Etsy, and I moved to San Francisco.
And just as kind of aside, we do this...
In the old days, we did this free advertising.
And so one thing that happened in episode 22
was that I talked about a meditation class I was taking.
So hit the clip.
This is my very San Francisco free advertising,
where I'm taking a meditation class that I've really enjoyed.
Oh.
And so it's this program called
Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction.
Okay.
And it's, like, a whole thing.
There's a Wikipedia.
It's a whole thing.
That's a whole thing.
Yeah.
And so, again, that's just kind of, like,
a thing that popped up.
It didn't seem related at all,
but ended up folding in later.
So just kind of, like, planting that seed now.
So anyway, like I was saying,
we kind of, like, siphoned off the system design,
which I think is a big part of, like, this conference
and other R conferences of, like, how do you do that?
How do you do that in a way that is, like, user-friendly?
What types of tools enable you to do that?
But then that left this huge, like,
how do you convince someone of something, essentially?
And so you started to think about that a lot,
and you had a really interesting episode
where you were, like, preparing for a talk, right?
I had to give a lecture.
I got promoted to all the full professors
that promoted at Hopkins to give a lecture.
And I had to give the talk, and I wanted to kind of,
I just wanted to play some music in the talk.
And so I had to kind of figure out some theoretical framework
for, like, me being able to put audio clips
into the lecture.
So I guess that's, I mean, it's a reasonable motivation.
That's right, and another professor
had, like, his entire lecture,
he was a biostatistics professor,
and his entire lecture was, like,
talking about, like, a Wagner opera.
Right, Igor Razinsky, anyway.
Like, no stats, anyway.
So I started thinking about, you know,
I've had a long history in music.
I've played the violin for now,
however old I am, 30-some years,
or that's not how old I am, but...
that's how long I've been playing.
And, you know, I've studied music theory.
I've done a lot of that kind of work,
and I just started thinking
that there kind of were some connections
between kind of what we do as data analysts
and kind of how we think about music,
and this is just a little bit
of kind of what we talked about in that episode.
Oops.
The more I thought about it,
the more I felt like there were
kind of connections between what we do
in data analysis, or not what we do,
what we need in data analysis,
and kind of music theory, right?
And so the basic idea
is that, you know,
music is considered to be
a very kind of subjective area,
like, you know, in terms of, like,
what you think is good and what you think is not good, right?
But that said,
most of us have a sense of, like,
what sounds good and what doesn't sound good.
Right, and I think I talked a lot about,
like, there is a theory of harmony.
There is a theory of melody.
There is, you know, in terms of how to construct certain things,
and those rules don't produce,
you know, the best music,
but they do allow us to describe
and to kind of summarize
what it is that people
seem to like about music,
and it's not an absolute,
you know, theory.
It's in culture and based in kind of,
you know, in people's kind of
collective ideas, but there is a
theoretical structure there.
And there's some, like, science
to it, right? I mean, there's literally, like,
wave properties. There is a little physics
involved, yeah. Yeah, and then
there's kind of like a psychology or
something, you know, like the, like,
wanting to hear chords resolved, for example.
Like, I'm not totally sure
what, I don't know, I mean, I feel like I'm like,
I'm like, continue the thought, please.
Well, I know, so I got
very deep in the weeds
reading Arnold Schoenberg's Harmon
Allure, and, you know, the way he summarizes it, I think,
in the best in the sense that
the theory doesn't say what's right,
the theory says what's commonly done.
Okay, yeah. And so the idea
that, you know, the five chord resolves
to the one chord, that's not because it's
right, it's just because that's what, it seems to be
what everyone does, and it seems to be kind of,
you know, not too bad of
an idea. Yeah. But if you don't resolve
the five chord to the one chord, it's not like
a theoretical violation. I'm just laughing
because... Uh-oh.
Well, I'm just thinking about that second
lecture, or the second keynote
where he got, like, really defensive
about pie charts, and I think that's
exactly, it's like, it's what
people are doing, like, you
can't argue with that. It is commonly done.
Yeah, and so, and it
seems to work for,
I'm with him, like, for certain things.
This is what happens at our podcast. Yeah.
We get sidetracked, and then, like,
two hours later, we end.
Yeah. Okay, anyway.
Yeah. I'm just trying
to illustrate that you were right.
Okay. Yeah, so.
So, okay, during this episode
two, I
sort of bring up where my mind had been
going, because, so at this point, I'd moved to Stitch Fix,
and I had some, like, really
amazing people I worked with in the product
org who allowed me to
participate more in product design.
One of the things was doing a design
sprint, which is kind of
a whole thing, but essentially, like,
I could see how design was working more
closely, and so
hit the clip.
It's funny, because I was concurrently
thinking about this, too, in terms of
designers who, I think,
actually have a very similar,
like, their place in the organization
is very similar to a data, like,
they're usually kind of a cross-functional team,
like, horizontally integrated,
and then you also have,
like, it's very
problem-solving focused, it's very
focused on,
like, it's similar to, like, the
consulting model,
but I think that they're more willing to
talk about that connection, like,
design is about the user
and designing for a team, like,
I feel like when you look at design
conferences, it's a lot more focused on that,
but then also
their products are on display, so I think
that, like, sharing what people
are doing is easier, because
you literally see, you know,
design elements on websites
when you go to them.
Yeah. So I was thinking
about design at the same time
you were thinking about music theory.
I think we thought we were talking about different things.
Yeah, exactly. Yeah.
Like, two different ways of approaching this problem.
So kind of
in the middle here, you know, I brought up
about, like, getting into meditation more,
and then I
essentially, like, in the middle of
all this, so I'm kind of reading about
design, and one thing you see
when you start to look into design
more is they talk so much about empathy,
empathy for the users,
and, like,
that's, like, something that is
just, like, an accepted
fact about working in that field,
and so at the same time, I'm,
like, getting more into meditation, I'm reading more
kind of, like, connections
between neuroscience and meditation,
and so I read this, like,
really dense Atlantic article
where there's a discussion between a
neuroscientist and a Buddhist
monk, and they're talking
kind of about, like,
experiences, and so
why don't you, like...
Just to be clear, this episode, I read the transcript again.
I'm still not sure I understand
what we were talking about.
Data analysis
to influence decision making
has to span both,
like, the world where third-person
perspective and kind of this, like, scientific
truth world is, and then also
that, like, first-person
eliciting belief
in another human when you
can't really observe what will make
that person start to believe
your results, and so...
Or, like, trust it.
So anyway, I just... I thought it added
clarity... To me, it added some clarity
of, like, how
the complexity of what
we do.
Yeah, so...
To set that up, the idea was
essentially that, like,
neuroscientists, they can study... In this case,
they're talking about studying people who are meditated,
and, like, you can't
exactly, like, empirically
observe, like, someone's in a
meditative state, right? Like, you can measure their brain
waves and stuff, but ultimately you have to rely
on the person telling you that they're in that
state, so you can, like, correlate the brain
waves with them having that state.
And so, to me, it was, like, kind of similar
where, in order for an
analysis to be successful,
someone has to be, like, I get it now.
You know? Yeah, they have to tell you
that they get it, and
you can't observe it, like...
I mean, you can obviously see their face change
or whatever, but, like, it's...
They're having, like, a first-person experience,
and so I was just, like, teasing apart,
like, oh, yeah, you have to, like, use
scientific methods and be in this world of science,
but then also you have to, like, tap
into this kind of, like, deeply empathetic
thing of seeing where
their mind is, and
that's hard.
I think I get it now.
Yeah. Yeah.
Good.
Do we have other clips from this episode? I don't think so.
No. Yeah.
Another thing, I think we might
have a clip for this one, was talking about how
blameless postmortems, like, around the
same time, too, I started to see how blameless postmortems
were... Well, why don't you just play the clip?
I think the biggest thing I realized
sort of almost right after
was
that in some ways
the
sort of blameless postmortem stuff
is a design
process,
and it's a way of almost,
like, making a
system to force everyone to be
empathetic.
Yeah, because the
point of the blameless postmortem is essentially to
say, you know, here, listen
to...
Listen to the problem. Don't blame the user.
Like, try to put yourself in their shoes.
Like, they essentially
force you. Like, you can't, like,
use you statements, or, you know, like, there's a lot
of kind of, like, rules of engagement.
And so
like, it all kind of, like,
started coming together. We're on the path.
We're on the path. Yeah. Yeah.
And the path ends at episode 63.
It's the first milestone. Yeah.
Which was the start. Some of you, if
you were listeners, will remember the seven
part book club
that we had for Natural Process Design
Thinking. Yeah. Which
some liked, some thought was
too long. Oh.
I don't want to hear that. But we won't. Yeah.
We'll get... We'll talk about feedback later.
Yeah.
Yeah. So I'll play the clip here
just so you know the name of the clip.
Oh, and this clip also really exemplifies
the podcast for people who don't listen
where it takes us a little while
to, like, get to the point.
Yes. In case you haven't already
figured that out. Yeah.
The name of this file is
all capped texting. All right.
Oops. That's
not what I was meant... designed to do.
There we go.
And all I know is, like, I got these, like,
messages that are, like, I guess
you took a picture of the Kindle
with your phone and then, like,
texted me the picture.
Is that right?
That is correct. And so I'm, like,
reading your photo
of a Kindle.
Well,
can you take a screenshot of a Kindle?
I feel like... I don't know. I've never owned one.
So I'm not sure. Oh. Oh.
You're just, like, tablet all the way.
Definitely.
So then I'm reading these, like, screenshots...
These photos... They're not screenshots. They're photos
of a screen. Yeah.
Okay. Photos of an E-Ink screen.
Yeah. I do
have a moment of pain when I see a photo
of, like, a computer screen.
Okay. And then, like,
I think what ensued was, like,
a series of, like, all-caps exchanges
between you and me that were, like,
oh, my God, I can't believe this is, like, exactly
what we're talking about. Exactly.
Yeah. No. It was, like, oh,
well, this articulates
what we've been
trying to say in, like,
a few sentences versus,
you know, you've written a series of
long blog posts. I mean, I think those are
so valuable. But not concise.
Yeah.
So I feel... This was the moment
where,
you know, we were talking about these...
Well, I guess it was... The book's called
Designly Ways of Knowing. Yeah.
And we were kind of
reading it, and she's sending me photos of the
book, and I'm reading the book along with her,
and I'm, like, send me the next page, and...
Yeah. Yeah.
And it was, like... So this was a book
essentially about the theory of...
Like, academic theory around design
and design work, and it was
just, like... To us, it was this huge
aha moment of, like, oh, it's all
starting to really make sense.
And what was making sense is that
design... The way that
designers work and the way that they structure
the work, the way they talk about it, you could
essentially, like, swap in the word data
analysis, and it was the same thing.
In so many ways, yeah. Yeah, in so many ways.
Like, the way that designers
talk about getting briefs, where it's, like,
oh, you get a design brief,
and then the...
You don't just... As a designer, you don't just
do what the person asks you, because
that will be, like, a sub-part. The person
doesn't know what they want. Like, they have
figured out some way to articulate it,
but your job as a designer
is to, like, zoom out and be, like,
identify what they actually need, and then
make the best solution about that.
But, like, they're going to communicate what they need
via what they think the solution is.
And that's the same... I mean, I think about that all the time
with, like, someone asks you for a
number, you know? They're, like, can you get me this number?
And then you have to, like, as a
data analyst, you have to zoom out and be, like, no, okay,
what problem are you trying to solve?
Why don't you catch me up on what you're doing, and maybe I'm
going to solve this in a totally different way.
Some of my collaborators, I think, would want me to just give them the number.
I know, yeah. That's okay, then.
Yeah. They don't stay collaborators
for long. Yeah.
That sounded really, like, way darker
than I meant it to be.
Yeah. I just stopped working with them.
It's not like... Yeah.
You don't want that.
But, so, that's
kind of, like, the end of our audio clips.
But, like, essentially we got to this place where it's, like,
okay, data analysis is a
type of, essentially, like, either
an independent thing or a type of design
thinking, where it's, like, the answer
to the student's question is essentially,
like, adopt this whole
other way of, like,
approaching the world that's totally different than science.
And we
haven't, like, totally, as a field,
we haven't totally, like,
addressed that difference.
I kind of wonder what I would have told that student
now, you know, more than 10 years later.
And, you know,
I think the way that I kind of think about it is that
when you go outside, you don't see a
data analysis walking around, right?
It doesn't naturally occur
like a tree or,
you know, what else naturally occurs?
A rock, right?
I only know about trees.
So
if it doesn't naturally occur,
it has to be built by someone, or it has to be
designed by someone, it has to be built.
And so why shouldn't we use the same ideas
there for
a data analysis as for, you might,
for a chair or a bridge or whatever?
That's a good point. Yeah, and, like,
I mean, same with the music, too, where, you know,
like, obviously noises exist,
but, like, crafting the
noises in a way that's, like, pleasing is
in many ways, even though it's art, it's also
design, right? And,
yeah, no, it's a good
way of putting it. Like, essentially, you're constructing something.
And then I also think what's
interesting is that whether
you're building, like, a production machine
learning pipeline or you're building an analysis,
like, the tools are different,
the types of testing
you'll do is different, like, kind of, like, the technical
requirements are different, but ultimately you're
doing the same thing, which is, like,
you're creating something that's gonna
do something for someone. Right.
Like, either it's gonna be a recommender system that creates
recommendations for a website
or it's, like, this analysis
that some sort of person's gonna
consume and make a decision based on
that. Might just be a PDF document?
Yeah, it could be, I mean, even, like, an email, literally
even an email with, like, one number
in it is still, you
have to decide, like, okay, this problem is
only, this problem can be sufficiently
addressed with an email and
that person doesn't need much context
and, therefore, if I just send them the
email, that'll be enough to, like, convince them
to do something. Right. Yeah.
And so
that put us on a really interesting
path of, like, okay, so if we
think that data science is, like, a
type of design, then how do
designers work? Like,
if you look at architects, how are they
trained? If you look at, you know,
other designers, how do they work
in companies, et cetera?
And so one of the things
in this design thinking book
by Nigel Cross is talking
a lot about, like, you just have to do it, like, over
and over, and you're gonna get
better every time you do it. You're gonna go through
different thought processes, but you have to
literally, like, exercise
the part of your brain that does this
constructive thinking rather
than, like, the deductive thinking
of science. So
it's like, okay, so in data
science, we kind of don't do that apprenticeship
model so much. I mean,
I think we wish we
didn't have to. Yeah.
Yeah, like, we wish we could just, like, teach
the stuff and be done with it, because
it's a lot of work to, like, go through someone's
work and tell them if it's working or not.
But ultimately, like, if we kind of
accept that this is a type of
design and construction, then you need to be able
to, like, practice it.
So we did some
cool stuff with that where
kind of, like, very different
than the types
of challenges you do with, like, Kaggle
and stuff, where they're like, here's a data set.
Analyze it. Instead, it was like, okay,
let's say you had to build your system end to
end. Like, you needed to answer some
question. We did, like, commute times.
Right. Yeah, we talked about, well, your
commute, I should say. Yeah, my commute. So it was like, in San
Francisco, it's like, I want to know exactly
how many minutes and the variance
in those minutes for different
commute methods so I can know, like, the last
possible minute that I can leave my apartment
to make it to a meeting.
And so it's
like, okay, how would you solve that?
How would you get the
data to solve that problem? How would you
store it? How would you access it?
How would you analyze it? How would you display it?
And then how would you model it? What are the fixed effects?
What are the random effects? Exactly.
It's amazing how just a simple
kind of formulation of a problem
can bring in every single aspect
of design, of
analysis, you know, presentation, communication.
Yeah, exactly.
Like, you're doing the whole thing.
And what I like about it, too, is that
the things like how you store the
data is sort of on the same
par as, like,
what models you choose. Like, all of
those things are equal. You have to end up spending time
on all of it instead of
I feel like as a
field, and what I like about this conference
is that, less so here, but as a field
we focus so much just on the methods, and that
really bothers me, in case
that hasn't been clear.
And I was actually
talking with someone last night about that, where I'm like, you know,
in some ways
like, the way that
normal data science conferences
are structured,
it's like, everyone wants to talk about
the best method, like the latest
thing. And literally, in that
system, you're motivated to have bad
data, because it gives you
more opportunity to do fancier
models. And so, like,
any system where it's like, oh, okay,
this person could work on worse
and worse data and be equally
happy because they get to do all these fancy
things they learned at this conference,
is like, that's not solving the
problem. That's like
choosing not to solve the problem.
So by focusing on the whole thing, it's like, no, okay,
can you hone in on exactly what data
you need, rather than just
making do with what might
have fallen into your lap
somewhere. I think one of the hardest things to do
in general, but also
in data science, is to kind of
pull
back from trying to maximize in a single
dimension. And I think,
to me, the way I interpreted
even JJ's talk, is like,
the way that corporations
are structured is they maximize on a certain
one dimension. And I think
it's hard, that can
end up with some good and some bad.
And I think in data science, it's very tempting
to kind of go for the optimal approach, go for the optimal
method, go for the best
prediction. But there are other elements
as other stakeholders, there are other trade-offs
to be made. I really like that
because in the second talk,
she just
touched it briefly at the end,
but it was like, what are
UX problems and what are
designer problems? And then
the one that was like, this is actually a design
problem, was the loss function.
It seems like it's just a data science problem,
but that's actually the core
user experience, is what loss function you use.
And what system are you actually building?
And what I like about that is that
it's like the same with the corporation thing.
It's like, what was the loss function
before versus that?
Change the KPIs, basically.
KPI, key performance
indicator. I don't deal with KPIs.
What? I don't deal with KPIs. Yeah, you don't
deal with KPIs. Not yet, at least.
Yeah, the way I've been talking about that
at Stitch Fix is like, yeah, how do we
rather than just
optimizing for sales, how can we
construct new KPIs that might
lead to different user experiences?
I feel like it would be great if we could move to a place
where instead of saying, this is the best thing,
we could say,
I really appreciate this set of trade-offs.
Yeah, yeah.
I like that. I don't know, but it doesn't quite
sound as nice,
I guess. I don't know.
I think it sounds...
I have one person with me here.
One other thing
that, kind of like the end of this timeline,
this has just been briefly,
but essentially
by getting to this place, now it opens up
a whole other set of
fields to look into,
which is everything around
creativity.
The book I'm mentioning,
that we're mentioning here, is called The Creative Curve,
and we had a one-episode
book club on that.
Learn our lesson.
Yeah.
I was actually about to suggest that we should do more.
I was like, let's retroactively go back
and do three episodes on that one.
Anyway.
The idea with that was that it was someone,
this guy, Alan Gannett, who essentially
empirically studied creative people
and how
they operate.
I thought it was awesome.
I really liked it. It really made me feel like,
oh, I can apply these principles to my data science work.
The principles
were...
I don't think I did ever
write them down. Consumption. Yeah.
There was consumption.
Creative people will frequently...
People who...
This is why I'm confused with you.
People who are engaged in movie making,
they watch movies 20%
of the time.
You're not like that for whatever reason.
That's a different story.
You look at...
Just again, from empirically looking at people
in these creative fields,
consuming other people's work is a big part of it.
You digest it, you think about it,
and you iterate on it.
I think that aspect...
If you want to write, you read a lot of books.
If you want to write music,
you listen to a lot of music.
One of the aspects that's difficult about data analysis
is it's not always easy to read a lot of data analyses
because they're not out there.
Especially in the corporate world,
data science specifically.
If you have a big team, you can read
whatever other people are doing,
but otherwise, basically only at conferences.
Or David Robinson's livestream.
Yeah.
It's hard to consume a lot of data analysis
is what I think it comes down to.
I think that's a key step to becoming
an expert in something.
That's a great point.
Iteration.
Is there imitation too?
Iteration is this idea that you just
keep going.
You keep doing things.
You do it over and over.
Again, that is touched in the design literature too.
You've got to keep doing things.
Ideas are going to evolve over time.
Part of why we wanted to go through those clips
and put up this timeline
is that
even the creativity
that we got from this podcast
that I totally wasn't expecting.
It took us four years.
This timeline is over four years.
Timeline's not to scale.
Yeah, definitely not to scale.
The number of ways that we attacked this problem
and thought about it
was a lot.
It never felt like it was work necessarily.
It was just iterating
and going on.
Then there's the community.
Yeah.
The community one.
Another one is creative communities.
You look at artists.
Andy Warhol had the factory
where it was just a bunch of artists
in a loft
painting, giving feedback.
With that,
surrounding yourself with other creative people
helps you be creative.
That's kind of like
my sitcom
happy ending here.
Coming to conferences like this,
they're fun, they're energizing.
I do think
they embody this creative community.
Especially because so many people
are isolated as data scientists.
Not every company
has 100 data scientists.
Most companies don't.
Being able to get together
and bounce ideas off
and see what other people are doing.
I guess what I'm trying to say is
that is the work.
It's not like this isn't
productive, if that makes sense.
There was one agenda item
for starting the podcast.
Part of it was to
produce that community
of people who may be sitting
in a department somewhere or
in a company somewhere by themselves.
They're forced to be the lone data analyst.
They don't have anyone to talk to
or they don't have the ability
to hear what other people are working on
and how they're approaching it.
That's some of the most
meaningful feedback I hear.
When people are like,
I'm alone and it's really nice
to be able to hear how other people are working.
That makes me feel really good.
And then feedback.
Feedback, yeah.
Feedback.
This one is definitely hard.
A big part of
in this creative
curve book and just in general with design
you actively
are soliciting user feedback all the time.
That's a huge part
of it and you cannot
be attached
to what you've produced, essentially.
You have to let the users tell you what to do.
I think that that is
extremely hard.
Getting feedback is hard.
Definitely
not something that people are trained to do.
Maybe it's just curmudgeonly
because I see it the most
but I feel like, especially in
academic stats and in
data science in general,
people do take it really personally.
There's that quote that I
kind of hate where it's like,
photographers and statisticians both
fall in love with their models.
I feel bad.
It makes the point.
You see people
really dig their heels in
and it just gets personal.
What I like
is that, at least with the user,
I think in the design field there's a lot more focus
on that accepting
feedback.
Also, another thing,
Hilary's personal corner,
the one thing
I did not expect
from starting this kind of meditation
practice and going down that path is that
it genuinely
made me better at getting
empathy and getting feedback.
The whole idea is
dissociating
yourself from who you think you are.
It allows you
to not feel personally threatened
if someone challenges you.
People take it personally
when your whole identity is that
you're a statistician and you're smart.
If someone says your
model is wrong, it's like,
oh no, I'm not smart anymore. My whole identity
is gone. Then you're
defensive.
Figuring out
ways, and for me, meditation,
just figuring out ways to
detach yourself from that
makes you able to take feedback.
Then that actually makes you
better at the thing. It's kind of like a paradox.
It's not like a
magical thing. It's something that can be practiced.
Exactly. The thing
about the meditation practice that
was a big paradigm shift for me was
that these things aren't just fixed properties.
It's not just like, oh, this person's
good at getting feedback or this person has a thick skin
and that's a set character
trait and mine is not
and that's done. It's like, no, there are
ways to
engage in practice that
makes you more robust to that.
Again,
looking at the neuroscience and
Buddhism stuff,
you have neuroplasticity
and you can make
new neural pathways.
It's not just like, oh, yeah,
I swear. There are
ways that you can essentially change your brain.
Actually, the
Nigel Cross stuff goes
into that. You look at people
who are cab drivers and their spatial
regions of their brains are much more
developed.
Doing creative work is hard
and it's very different than doing
scientific work and it's
also what we're doing.
There are ways to get good at it.
There's ways to practice it. There's
ways to get good.
Doing this whole podcast,
being okay with
reiterating and showing
things that will be wrong in the future
is like, it's
okay and actually it'll make you better.
That's kind of why
I feel like I've wanted to talk so much
about the design thinking is because
I want people to
feel empowered to engage
in that part of honing
their craft
and not feeling intimidated
by it. I think probably a lot of people in this
room don't think they're creative.
I didn't think I was creative.
It's just like identity. It's like I'm a scientist.
Hillary does math and science.
I want
people to go through that same process I went
through of opening up that side of myself
and being like,
this stuff all makes me better at this
work and it's more fun because of it.
You can do it too.
Anyone can do it.
Anyway, that was like sitcom
ending.
We do have one more.
That was like big recurring theme. We have one more
recurring theme that
we are not open to feedback on.
We have one piece of
this is the only data in our whole
You didn't make this in R, right?
We do have R
in this talk.
This is a GG plot actually.
We have one more clip.
Now we're bringing
tea time to the internet.
Exactly.
I actually have tea today though.
I've also gotten into coffee now.
No!
I know.
Maybe I'll bring coffee time.
That doesn't sound right.
The lead up to that was
this podcast in part was
I went to grad school where Roger was
a professor and we had this tea time thing
and we had all these conversations
and enjoyed them.
I'm into coffee.
We can no longer have tea time.
This is where Hillary switches.
It really did.
It really was post grad school.
This is a long rant.
Most of my life I had bad coffee.
I think we all.
The guy from
Australia was talking
about how it's an experience
to have bad diner
coffee.
On the x-axis is episode number.
On the y-axis is number of mentions
of the word coffee.
It's good to have transcripts.
Thank you, Stringer Package.
Hillary switches to
tea to coffee.
Episode 36 is where I say people shouldn't talk
about drinking things on podcasts.
You go on a kind of long rant
about listening to other podcasts
and the fact that they're talking about the bourbon
they drink.
That doesn't belong on a podcast.
You were harsh.
I thought you were saying people shouldn't
actively be drinking alcohol on a podcast.
You're like, no, no, no.
Talking about the bourbon.
It's really annoying.
We can't say cause and effect here.
The number of instances has gone up.
This will be the hill we die on.
Based on feedback
I was open to it.
I got this mocha pot to make coffee
and I literally couldn't give it away.
We had a whole episode
about if anyone here wanted it
I'm willing to give it away
and no one emailed us.
No one wants the mocha pot.
Last night we got some more feedback
about a new device.
If you don't like coffee
don't talk to us.
We're going to keep on going.
I did have a tie-in for this.
I was thinking about it
to the Soulcraft
shop class
where it's kind of like
you just have to do stuff.
I started making coffee
and then I wanted to talk about it more.
The more that you do something
you can kind of fall in love with anything
and you just have to do it a bunch
and you start to care about it.
Again, to the creativity
it's like just start trying
and you'll start to like it more
and you'll start to feel more empowered
to talk about it
and then you'll bother everyone around you
by talking about it way too much.
And then you'll do a keynote at RStudioCon.
So that's our episode.
Thanks for listening.
And thanks to RStudioCon for having us here.
Thank you.
Alright.